Proposal #4: Advanced stateful firewall
Responsible: Roland Meier

Firewalls are an essential component to control access to a network. While firewalls provided rather
basic functionality in the past (such as allowing or blocking access depending on the endpoint or
application), today's "next‑generation" firewalls provide many additional features (such as serving as a
VPN endpoint or performing deep packet inspection (DPI)). However, such tasks are usually implemented
in the control plane and massively degrade the throughput of a firewall such that even high‑end
professional firewalls act as a bottleneck for the network bandwidth.

The scope of this project is to implement an advanced firewall in P4. Starring with a basic stateful firewall
as discussed in the lecture (one that only allows established connections from inside), the students are
expected to implement additional features such as:
‑ Allow fine‑grained policies per device class (e.g. a Webcam can only access few servers, a host can
access all destinations)
‑ Port knocking (a simple way to allow remote access like in a VPN)
‑ Block hosts that are performing well‑known attacks (such as SYN‑flooding)
‑ Detect DDoS attacks where the attackers or the victims are in the internal network
‑ Detect (and prevent) address spoofing
‑ ... (the students are invited to come up with own ideas for additional functions)

Objectives:
The final result should support a subset of the above features (and features suggested by the students)
and implement them in a resource‑efficient way (i.e. use as few registers as possible). Ideally, most of the
computation is done in the data plane (potentially after implementing own externs for P4), however it is
also possible to offload certain tasks to a controller.

Tasks:
‑ Implement a stateful firewall that only allows connections which are established from the
internal network
‑ Extend implementation to support basic white‑/ and blacklists (e.g., allow or block traffic
depending on the IP, port, ...)
‑ Implement a controller that can interact with the firewall configuration
and enable the switch to send parts of the traffic to the controller (e.g. for DPI)
‑ Extend implementation with features from above and with your own features
